uh thank you paul uh galaxies in the
milky way i've got an easy talk
so all the stars we see in the night sky
the stars in our galaxy
so
what can we see
well if you're lucky
you can see a faint band of stars going
across the sky
um if you've got can get away from the
light pollution
and it is a faint band but you can just
see it
just in cambridge i know at the
institute when we're doing observing we
can just see it directly above us
where the light pollution isn't too bad
but
modern cameras
make the milky way stand out much better
than ever we can see it we can never see
it with this
like with our naked eye like in this
diagram on the left
but it's uh
this is very similar
to this galaxy here
you can see we're not exactly looking at
the edge of the spiral arms
and the same here
and
we're just above
the plane of the milky way so we can see
the central bulge of the milky way
on the left hand side just just as we
can
here and of all those stars we can see
in that milky way how many is that
well if i was to tell you a number it
would be meaningless
so let's count them
let's get a bag of rice kilogram bag of
rice
and let each one of us
count
the grains of rice in the in the bag
one grain of rice represents one star in
our galaxy
so off you go and all 12 of us
will count the bag of rice but i don't
want to count one bag i want you to
count 10 bags
and then
tomorrow night come back and count
another 10 bags of rice
and the night after another 10 bags come
back next week next month
to the end of the year
every day counting 10 bags of rice all
12 of us
and we'd have to do that
for 45 years
to get
the
approximate number of the grains of rice
equaling the
numbers of stars in our galaxy
and if you're wondering how much uh rice
that is that's over 60 lorries were
loads worth
now three weeks ago we covered the
hertzbung russell diagram in some detail
but just to refresh
most of the stars spend most of their
life on this main sequence
where they took to confuse
hydrogen into
helium and this is the cool end of the
chart the diagram
cooler stars here getting hotter and
hotter
and becoming
blue hot and these are the hottest stars
and then
just above the main sequence are the red
stars these are dying stars as our sun
will turn into a red giant it will move
up to this phase
and the other area is the white dwarfs
and once the star has finished its life
it ends up as a white dwarf the
now they categorize these uh stars in um
order of temperature so m type stars are
the coolest
and you can have m
dwarfs and m giants
and the same with k and g
but the main sequence star here
become very large the o and b stars
become giants on their own and there
they have very short lives because
they're galloping through their nuclear
fuel these stars live fast and die young
so of all the stars in the milky way
each square represents a billion stars
and as you can see
three quarters of them are m-type stars
the cooler stars
but only a very few are giant stars this
diagram here
shows just the giant stars taken from
this here
so all the stars in our
galaxy are mostly dwarf stars
the a f g
k and m type stars
and as you can see as they get bigger
and hotter
they get fewer and fewer
and yet the stars we see in the night
sky are mostly
these giant stars
giant stars that have died or
in the process of dying
red giants
or blue giants
in them and the main sequence
but these colors
are a bit exaggerated this is how you
see the colors of the stars through a
telescope mostly they just look white
but if you get a
a nice pair of stars contrasting colors
you'll see
that you can pick up the colors
of the stars and thus the temperatures
so the blue stars is hotter than this
yellow star
this is a very nice double star in the
constellation of cygnus
so that's what we see
most of these
naked eye stars
are giant stars
that are galloping through their nuclear
fuel or dying stars these red giants
so how many of the actual red dwarfs the
ones that make up three quarters of our
galaxy how many red dwarfs can you see
in the night sky
with your naked eye
the answer is none whatsoever unless
you've got exceptional eyesight
and you're on the top of a a mountain
somewhere because the
brightest
uh red
dwarf star is just below naked eye
brightness but a few people claim to
have seen
it
and what's the average distance between
stars in our galaxy
it turns out to be about four light
years and i'm sure this is one figure
you know
what's the nearest distance the nearest
star
4.3 light years i believe every school
boy knew that once upon a time
and
the quiz question is could we go there
well we could always use a surplus satin
five moon rocket
here's uh a photograph of it going
through the atmosphere and it's breaking
the sound barrow barrier as it speeds up
through the atmosphere and they've got a
couple left in museums i'm sure a wipe
over with an oily rag and charge the
batteries up put some fuel in and you
could whizz off
they did test one of the uh big engines
at the bottom of the saturn 5
just a year or two ago and it still
works because they wanted they were
developing their new space launch system
and they wanted some further information
on the rocket
so if you could get the saturn 5 to work
and fly at 30 times the speed of sound
which is the fastest it went
going to the moon it would take you just
five months
to get to the moon
so how long would it take
to get from the sun
to alpha centauri using a satin five
well you'd need a fair old
uh
time to do it so if columbus
rather than setting off to look for
india
set off in his moon rocket to go to the
nearest star
how far would he have got
by 2022
over 500 years
and the answer is
just half of one percent the way there
just eight light days traveling at that
speed for all that length of time
so the distances to the stars are vast
but on this scale the sun and alpha
centauri
would be invisible they wouldn't even be
a pixel
on my computer screen
so let's change it to something that's
more sensible here's the sun a pea in
cambridge
and here's alpha centauri
a pea a peppercorn and a grain of salt
in swindon
and of course columbus would have only
gone just over 700 meters away from the
sun during his five-year
500-year journey
to towards the stars
so the stars
the distance between the stars is
absolutely vast
compared to their diameter
but things are very different
with
galaxies
here's the milky way and
a few of our larger galaxies in our
group and you can see that the
anti-andromeda galaxy is about
13-14 milky way diameters away
so
by this
according to their size they're not that
far apart
but if we add in all the
local group and most of these are just
dwarf
galaxies which are the crumbs left over
from
when the bigger galaxies were formed
now when does a group become a cluster
well it's usually about
somewhere between 30 and 50.
um
galaxies like to cluster together
and as you can see some galaxies are in
small groups just four or five
but others are in vast collections
and the virgo cluster has got uh uh
probably over 1500 galaxies and all
are just a few diameters away from each
other
so the obvious thing is it's not
surprising that they collide into each
other
and here's a a very famous one the
antennae galaxy two spiral galaxies
that have colliding
and you can see that two tails have been
thrown out gravitationally
from each side but in the
in the close-up of the two main main
bodies of the galaxies coming together
you can see the nucleus
and there's a lot of disruption going on
and that they've lost their spiral
structure
but the amazing thing is that two
galaxies colliding
you'll find because the stars are so far
apart
no two stars will collide
of course you can do computer
simulations to see
how these galaxies merge
but
to check things out
we can only look at snapshots
of galaxies colliding
and here's a couple of galaxies that
look
that
are coming together and
would be how the antenna galaxy looked
900 million years ago
and then as they pass each other
again they're confused and there's a lot
of disruption going on this is how the
antenna would have looked 600 million
years ago and again
once they've gone past they are now
gravitationally bound
and there is no escape for either of
them and here they've got
formed those characteristic tails
but galaxies can even pass through each
other
and when uh if they if they don't get
caught
they can they can
escape
which is fairly unusual
galaxies tend to have comes together in
a sort of spiral motion around each
other and that's why they get captured
but here's a galaxy passing right
through you can just see the nucleus of
the spiral galaxy here
again
it's lost its spiral structure
and the cartwheel galaxy
a galaxy is shot past through it
and caused ripples like dropping a stone
in a pond and you've got a ring coming
out
and astronomers wondered which two of
which one of these two galaxies
went through it well the answer is
use radio astronomy and using one of the
largest radio telescopes in the world at
greenbank west virginia
they studied it
and the answer is
neither of them
was the culprit
the the trial of radio emission led to a
a very distant galaxy
that had caused this uh problem
but
normally has to say galaxies get
captured
and start to oscillate through each
other
and here you can see rings
around these shell galaxies
this is a record of the
passage of the one galaxy through
another here's a particularly nice one
you can see several
shells
showing
how the two galaxies have merged you
can't see the second galaxy it's a bit
like how successive tides uh form
leaving bands of seaweed as the tides
get less and less
and again this is a like a a fossil
record of the encounter
but giant elliptical galaxies just keep
getting bigger they keep munching on
smaller or and other galaxies
dwarf galaxies spiral galaxies and
smaller elliptical galaxies and they
just keep getting bigger
and this one in a bell don't worry about
the number it it's just that george
abell uh compiled a list of galaxy
clusters and that's what astronomers
tend to use so just don't worry about
the number and here's one of the largest
elliptical galaxies and when the image
is processed
you can see
that it's eaten
five other galaxies
in a fairly recent past
other other galaxies uh will have merged
much
longer ago and there the nucleus of
these galaxies
will be lost
but the biggest galaxy of all in another
a bell cluster is this monster known as
ic 1101 and it's colossal
and here's the local group on the same
scale as this giant elliptical galaxy
it could swallow the local group whole
it's massive
and you tend to find these
huge giant elliptical galaxies
usually at the center of clusters
so what's the future hold for us
well we know by looking at
the spectrum of our local galaxies
by the the spectral lines tell us
whether they're approaching
or receding and by measuring their
radial velocities we can see that the
andromeda galaxy is coming towards us at
about 300 kilometers a second
the triangulum galaxy is also coming
towards us but it's being pulled about
by the andromeda
whereas the two magellanic clouds
smaller galaxies not too far away from
us better can only be seen in the
southern sky
they're both going away from us
but a satellite launched in 2013 the
gaia spacecraft
measured the stars and positions of
stars very accurately
it had two mirrors rectangular mirrors
strangely
and it
would measure the positions of stars
many times
and get an accurate fix on them
but the third data release in them you
can see
it's only
it's only measured
1.8 billion star positions
and that's how many stars we said there
were in the galaxy
each one of these scar starts squares
representing a billion stars so it's
it's got a long way to map a lot of the
galaxy so it's hardly it's not done one
percent of the galaxy but that's enough
to give astronomers a fascinating
insight to what is going on
and one of the uh results from gaia was
the the group from cambridge university
actually found a bridge between the two
magellanic clouds here's the large
magellanic cloud and the small
magellanic down there
just by studying the certain variable
stars that
occur in and around
the
magellanic clouds neighborhood
so with this information from the
uh uh
gaia system we now know what's going to
happen
the small magellanic cloud's going to
carry on doing its own thing
but the large magellanic cloud will
gradually slow down in about a billion
years time will start heading back
towards the milky way which is being
drawn
towards the andromeda galaxy
and the same
with the andromeda galaxy
and in about four and a half billion
years time
they'll sweep past each other but then
they'll be captured
and after that at about six billion
years the two will finally merge
there may be some oscillation uh going
one passing through each other
whereas the triangulum galaxy will just
be a
spectator
happily orbiting around and will
probably no doubt spiral round into the
train wreck
but the merger of these two spiral
galaxy will
will result in a giant elliptical galaxy
and of course computer simulations have
done here you see the two galaxies uh
coming together but can't get away from
each other while triangulum just scoots
by
all right
now
spiral galaxies
have been observed
for a fair while but it wasn't always
possible to see the spiral structure
because although the photographs
we see now show wonderful spiral
structure however when you look at
things with the naked eye the spiral
arms are terribly faint
often you can only see the nucleus
through a telescope and like herschel
here he didn't quite have the aperture
to see the spiral structure
however
some
a little while later
with this giant telescope with four
times the aperture of john herschel's
telescope
he did
the lord ross
did manage to spot the spiral structure
and he made a pretty good drawing of it
as you can see here here's a modern
negative photograph uh showing stars as
black and the
dark sky is white so
just to
illustrate
what a good job he did of it
but there became an argument as to
whether these spiral galaxies were part
of our own galaxy
or separate island universe
shapley argued
that the spiral nebulae was simply
clouds in our galaxy and
we lived in a smallish universe
whereas curtis
thought that spiral nebulae was separate
bodies outside
our galaxy a humongous universe
and they they decided to have a debate
uh in uh all just over 100 years ago in
the smithsonian museum
and evidence was given
over the day
but the
evidence that uh shapley used was that
uh van maanen
had measured
the movement of
stars
and clumps of stars in a spiral galaxy
i hope you can see the spiral structure
um this is for the pinwheel galaxy
but this is the original photograph and
you can see the arrows he's moved on
where where the clusters or or group of
stars have moved and it appears to so
show some sort of rotation and this
could only happen
if
the galaxy was close by
photographs had shown the spiral
structure very well
and curtis proposed that
something like the andromeda galaxy
could be half a
million billion light years away
but most of us astronomers wouldn't
accept that they preferred to go with
the evidence that uh shapley was showing
it was led to left to edwin hubble
and using the fairly new largest
telescope in the world the hooker
telescope he took some photographs of
the
galaxy the andromeda galaxy and he could
see individual stars in there and he's
uh
noted
that he's put and marked some of the
stars with an end
and this was a nova a bright star that
flared up and he was able to see the
star getting brighter
and you can see here from his original
notebook nova
suspected and then a few nights later
his
confirmed
nova suspected so he could actually see
stars varying in brightness
and then he noticed one star
dimmed again and then brightened
so it was on a varying on a regular
basis
and you can see he's crossed out n for
nova and put v
v a r for variable
so he'd discovered that
if these types of variable
could be seen here and you knew how
bright they were in our own galaxy you
could work out the distance
and this he did
he sent this uh a chart
to shapley
and he worked out
that the andromeda galaxy was about a
million i said a billion didn't half a
billion i meant half a million
sorry about that he reckoned that that
the
um
the andromeda galaxy was about a million
light years
away
and here you can see the light curve
where he's taken a great deal of
photographs and measured the brightness
of each of this variable and you can see
it's got a characteristic light curve
that we can compare with
uh light curves of uh cepheid variables
in our own galaxy and this is what gave
him the
idea of how far away is and of course
poor old shapley after he opened this
letter and read it and he said to
somebody in the office
here is a letter that has destroyed my
universe
so from then on it was then realized
that these galaxies
were separate island universes we have
several types we have the spiral galaxy
elliptical galaxies irregular galaxies
some somewhat like the
two magellanic clouds
and barred spirals and of course giant
ellipticals which you usually find in
the center of
clusters and of course
lots of dwarf galaxies but of course we
only see those uh around our
own system we can see a few dwarf
galaxies around the nearby galaxies but
generally they're very difficult to see
at any great distance
but others galaxies began to be found
about 20 years later carl seifert
noticed that there was a group of
galaxies with a very bright center and
it seemed to account for 10
of all the spirals and they were named
seafort galaxies and then of course
quasars came a few years later uh a word
that everybody's familiar with but these
are very bright compared to safer
galaxies
and generally they outshine the rest of
the galaxy and sometimes you have a real
difficulty seeing the galaxy they're in
and a few years after this became eve
found even more energetic are
objects known as blazers
and again very compact source
so what are these objects
well in this artist's impression of
a a disc of material spiraling down onto
a black hole
we can see the jets of material that
coming off the black hole
at a greater very nearly the speed of
light
but this uh this supermassive black hole
and there are supermassive black holes
in the centers of most galaxies
what you're actually seeing if you look
at the galaxy obliquely don't forget
this is just as a black hole and it
would be in the galaxy so imagine the
rest of the spiral galaxy
scene edge on in this bit as you look at
the seafoot galaxies you're seeing the
bright nucleus
a quasar you're looking morely directly
down
and a blazer you're looking down the
barrel of a rifle so
that explains those
but
black black holes
supermassive black holes weren't
accepted
until uh
they was hypothesized in 1971 by two
astronomers uh lyndon bell and
martin reese and
good news is martin reece is coming to
give us a lecture later in the year and
now we'll be back at the institute we'll
be able to hear him properly anyway they
said that they
suggested that there would be black
holes in the center of most galaxies
and they only had to wait four years
before radio astronomers
picked up the supermassive black hole at
the center of our galaxy
and it was subsequently called
sagittarius a star
but the trouble is
we live in a very dusty spiral galaxy
and as we look towards the center of the
galaxy
our view is obscured
just like the mist on a misty night as
we look further in the stars get harder
and harder to see
and here we're looking towards the
center of our galaxy and you can see the
obscuring material
and this present prevents us from seeing
the center of our galaxy however
astronomers have tricks up their sleeves
here's the
uh
hubble space telescope and it has
it can work at two main frequencies
visible light here's the eagle
nebula invisible light but it can also
work in the infrareds part of the
spectrum
and when it looked at the eagle nebula
in the
infrared
you could see it sees through the dust
and gas
to thousands and thousands of stars
beyond the eagle nebula so using
infrared
is
one way of getting around this problem
of seeing through dust and gas and this
is one of the reason that astronomers
are counting on the james webb space
telescope
but using ground-based stock as
uh telescopes like the keck one of the
keck telescopes and these uh one of the
largest in the world they've got meat
mirrors 10 meters across that collect an
awful lot of light
and
you can see here that over a period of
years they were able to map out the
motions
of the nearby stars going around
sagittarius a star
and when you've got two complete orbits
here you can see in pink and
orange
all stars that orbit around the uh
supermass
supermassive black hole are given s
numbers
so this is s2 and when you've got two
you can see
you can work out the mass of this
the black hole
and i've put this little ring here and
this is on the same scale as the earth's
uh
solar system with
neptune being the furthest planet
so these two stars
passed a fair distance away from the
black hole but was still influenced as
you can see
s2
was traveling
at
two and a half percent the speed of
light
which is for a fair old lick
but how big is the massive supermassive
black hole whereas they calculated it
just over four million solar masses
but the event horizon
is quite small here's the sun and it's
about four some four and a half light
seconds across
the event horizon upon which
nothing
once it passes can get back out
it's only
one and a
one and a bit light minutes across so
it's tiny in comparison to the size of
our orbit of neptune
but the gravitational effect that this
supermassive
black hole reaches far into the milky
way
was the milky way ever a quasar well
quasars
is a when material
falls into the black hole
but our black hole
has eaten all the material around it and
so he's not active
so yes
astronomers think that
our you know in in the early um history
of the milky way
we were a quasar
until the material was used up
but has it had a decent meal since
it used up all the material around the
black hole
well yes about uh
six
million years ago
there were these two bubbles that have
formed since
and it was picked up by the fermi
satellite here you can see the original
data it's been processed and you can see
the two bubbles
and this is the result
of
our black hole consuming about 100 solar
masses of material
so it was almost uh
sort of like a quasar for a very short
time
not a massive amount of
energy well a lot of energy coming out
and these two gas clouds have
left over are the echo
the x-rays and cosmic rays here
then in
2013 a gas cloud was seen coming
towards our black hole and in this
computer simulation
they knew it would sweep round but
material would get drawn off
and disappear into the black hole and as
material disappears into black and the
black hole it would
emit x-rays and we'd be able to pick it
up
so that they got
told the media and of course all the
diagrams were produced for the press
and the astronomers sat back to watch
the fun
but the strange thing was
the gas cloud
just swept past
and no material
went into the black hole here you can
see an animation
and it just
nothing happened
why they think they got the mass wrong
of
this
gas cloud and it was heavier than they
thought
and
it had sufficient momentum to carry it a
little bit further away from the black
hole so no stuff got stripped off
uh again there's another little snack
been eaten
this is uh from the chandra
x-ray telescope ignore this
fluctuating image here this is just a
stare star a magnitude star
that's in the line of sight but you can
see the flare it's repeated
as a an object
falls into
a black hole
and they reckon it was something
like
an asteroid
nothing too big but if we were able to
detect it
and again a few years ago there was
another flare here you see it
and
there the possibilities were
was it another asteroid that got munched
like that one or
maybe
some material got pulled off that s2
star as it went fairly close to
the black hole in 2018.
or
was it some material that did get pulled
off that uh gas cloud
they've done the calculations
and they believe
that it was actually some gas that was
torn off from this
that went round in 2014
and it's taken five years to to reach
the black hole and spiral down and be
recorded as a
flash
over a few hours and um
in in the
black hole supermassive black hole
but a couple of years ago they found
some more s stars that went even closer
than the ones that have been known for a
number of years in particular
these two
they went very close to the black hole
and these stars may result in
ours
and what's the squeeze are
well squeeze r is when
a star orbits round uh a black hole but
as it comes close it gets squished by
the immense gravitational pull of the
supermassive black hole in the center of
our galaxy and then as it zooms out
it regains its shape as it gets further
away
from the black hole
but
because
it's things happen differently when
you're in the neighborhood of a black
hole
newtonian physics has to give way to the
physics of
einstein
and as you can see
the two of them
are definite candidates to be these
squeeze ours and the one of them
will pick up enough speed to go nearly
10 percent the speed of light
making it the fastest star known
so they're going to keep an eye on that
now we come on to spiral galaxies and
their uh
star formation
there's uh
several theories but the main one is
that
the spiral arms are caused by density
waves
these spiral structures aren't fixed
they're just more an illusion and the
other is the spiral structure can be
stirred up by another galaxy now this is
the pinwheel
that uh
was featured in the great debate
and what happens
is that stars bunch together
to create to form a spiral arm but
they're moving through the spiral arm
it's a bit like cars coming towards a
road traffic accident everybody wants to
see a body so everybody slows down
and then speeds up so the
spiral arm isn't fixed it's just this
collection of stars
that were passing by
and
here we can see
an animation you see the stars
catch up with the spiral arm
sorry the molecular clouds the clouds
of gas and dust and then they're
squished by the density wave that
triggers star formation and then young
stars leave the leading edge of the
spiral arm
so that's a density waves
the other way is by
a passing galaxy
and again
the spiral arms you can see younger
stars on the inner edge
and older stars on the outer edge
and of course this is bodes galaxy and
we know why that's got some spiral
structure
because this fellow
just went by
and has disrupted things and in computer
simulations you can see how an
elliptical galaxy can develop into a
spiral galaxy as a passing galaxy goes
by
but the most common type of galax spiral
galaxy is the bard spiral and our milky
way has a bards
going across it so we're
we're in the two-thirds of the galaxy
of the spiral galaxies that have a bar
but how do bars form
normally stars orbit a galaxy
but the
density waves will upset their motions
and gradually their orbits will deviate
and
get the more they go round the more
elliptical they become until
all the stars become locked
in this bar
and as the
galaxy ages
more and more stars join this bar
and it seems that as the future of the
gala get universe is that more and more
bad spirals will form
early on in the universe there were very
few barred spirals but they're becoming
more and more numerous
so there's there's an a nice
bad spiral as i said it makes up
two-thirds of all
spiral galaxies
and that's me done there's just a few
facts to remember
that when two star galaxies collide it's
unlikely two stars will ever hit
and if you're wondering how many grains
of rice was in a bag of uh pesco's rice
that's 50 000 and i've counted them
and
my main trouble of living in the milky
way
is it's so difficult to know its size
and shape and the number of stars with
any great accuracy
because if you've worked out that uh
if you worked out that uh you count 10
bags
a night for 45 years and times by 12
people when you worked out the number of
stars that is
that could easily be
double that figure or half that figure
that's just shows how
we don't know that the number of stars
in our
galaxy with any great accuracy
and just uh an average density of
interstellar space in our galaxy is
about one atom per cubic centimeter
that's about one dust particle
every cubic meter
okay
that's me done
i'll finish there